what is CAP theorem?
C - consistency 
A - availabilty
P - partition-tolerance (I would prefer network-partition and name it as CAN theorem)

in distributed system you can achieve either CP or AP, why?

Given:-
consider we have 3 nodes nodeA, nodeB, nodeC and a network-partition occurs - meaning nodeC is unreachable from nodeA and nodeB

PartitionTolerence:-
    the system should still respond. and the network-partition is expected to happen (never experienced maybe in prod it happens I guess)
hence the system should always be tolerant to network-partition

consistency:-
    assume we have a replication factor of 2.
    take the isolated nodeC. writes are routed to nodeC as nodeC is still reachable to the co-ordinator or the user. it is not reachable from the peer nodes.
    as s consistent system we prefer, unsuccessful writes over successful stale writes, as nodeC cannot replicate the write request with nodeA or nodeB.
    the system is unavailable to serve the request. but it is consistent. this is prefered where strong consistency must be obeyed like banking system.

availability:-
    assume we have a replication factor of 2.
    take the isolated nodeC. writes are routed to nodeC as nodeC is still reachable to the co-ordinator or the user. it is not reachable from the peer nodes.
    as a highly-available system we prefer, successful stale writes over unsuccessful writes. as nodeC can accept request. where nodeA and nodeB are still serving stale data
    the system is inconsistent now, but it is available. this is prefered where eventual-consistency is acceptable. like a email-search system.

CAP-theorem:-
    the system is always partition-tolerence. (this is set only for explaining consistency vs available more like a condition for setting up the CAP theorem) partition-tolerence alone is not a big deal here. this is like a pre-condition to choose C vs P.
    in case of distributed system, we can either achieve either CP or AP in case of network-partition
    because if you accept request in an isolated node, then the read from other nodes with be inconsistent and available. or you the isolated node can drop the request making system both unavailable and consistent.


question:-
    in case of sticky routing reqeusts, the write and read request will be targeted to the same node. then why will I face inconsistency? 
    ans: what if the node is not reachable by the router/co-ordinator? what if the router/co-ordinator is unable to elect new leader to serve the isolated node's request? now the system has to decide whether to accept the reqeust and be inconsistent+available or drop the request and be unavailable+consistent.




